
Keywords: Subjectivity, Text Mining, Natural Language Processing, Text Vectorization, Social Media
1. Introduction
Subjectivity refers to the idea that any opinion of an individual (or a collective) is shaped by its socio-cultural experience. The way one feels and reacts is affected by the social
and cultural situations the subject has been exposed. Each subject has its own experience, creating their unique way to read
the environment. This form of diversity affects different aspects of human life. For instance, political subjectivity is the
set of thoughts, motivations, feelings that a social subject has
within a society. This type of subjectivity determines the bias
towards a political ideology (Ransom, 1997). According to
Damasio (2018), subjectivity is the central constitutive element of consciousness. Without subjectivity, the individual is
incapable of reflection and discernment and, therefore, is incapable of being creative.
Subjectivity is also linked to emotions, as highlighted by
Harré (1986), stating that emotions are the result of a social
construction mechanism (“The social construction of emotions”). More recently, the anthropologist Tanya M. Luhrmann (2006) creates a theory of subjectivity with the help of
a psychological model of emotion. Emotional responses are
the consequence of the way the subject perceived an external
stimulus. Due to subjectivity, this response occurs differently,
depending on the subject perceiving it.
Subjectivity has an impact in a wide variety of human activities and the criteria to determine it may be applied to evaluate a more general relative relevance of a context to evaluate
text. We will provide some examples of this in the conclusions.
In this paper, we use as a test case to evaluate our approach
to value subjectivity in text analysis, the emotional reactions
to a divisive political topic.
We use emotions as an example of a criteria for subjective
classifications, being emotions a quintessential example of
subjectivity. For all intents and purposes, emotions are the
"what" we want to evaluate, not the "how", that is the core of
